morning.
It is a joy to be with you this morning and I hope your Father's Day is a great day today from whichever perspective you approach it.
Some of us this morning are blessed to have our dads still with us and we can give them a hug and we can feed them a great dinner and tell them how much we love them so hope today is that day for you.
Others are going to remember and honor a dad who is no longer with them but hope those memories are great and a great time to give thanks to God.
I'm in a latter category and I'll never forget all of the fatherly advice that my dad gave me.
So, you know, dads, I think we kind of all know that dads have a way of being able to, should I say, encourage us in the right way.
My dad could speak the truth and when he spoke, I always knew whether I agreed with him or not.
I knew that he spoke in love and that he spoke in my best interest.
He could say things that other people wouldn't say and he was willing to say things.
that other people wouldn't say.
So with that in mind, I want to begin this morning just looking at a text.
Now, this is not going to be our primary text as we talk about focus, but I do want to look at a text that the apostle Paul gave to Timothy.
Timothy was, in many ways, a protege.
Paul was a mentor.
Paul was like a spiritual dad to Timothy.
And this is in 1 Timothy, chapter 4, verse 16.
Paul says, to Timothy, pay close attention to yourself and to your teaching.
Persevering these things, for as you do this, you will ensure salvation both for yourself and for those who hear you.
I think a lot of times we read this text, we gravitate very quickly and understand the importance, and there is great importance, to this part where he says to Timothy, pay close attention to your teaching.
But this morning, I want to focus on the first part of that.
I don't want to jump over it.
Sometimes we do this part, which sounds like a dad to me when he says, pay close attention to
yourself.
You know, I can't remember how many times my dad said something like that to me.
And I think about it as we think, all of us, about this new season of ministry here at Concord, what God has for us in the part that we play, all of us play in this new season of ministry.
I mean, last week we talked about the fact that we need to focus on our mission.
So at Concord, that means making disciples everywhere.
We talked about how it's important to fix our eyes on Jesus because He can renew our strength to run the race that is set before us.
But this morning, I want to change to the next thing we need to focus on.
That's not our mission, but it's myself.
We don't just need to focus on our mission.
All of us at this season in our life as a church need to focus on ourselves.
When you stop to think about it, the truth is that whether or not we're going to be able to accomplish the mission that Jesus has given us to make disciples everywhere is not really primarily tied to how great our programs are.
I mean, our children's program or our worship program, I mean, these things are important, but that's not what primarily drives our ability to accomplish that mission.
It's not primarily tied to how great the technology is.
or how great the music is on a given Sunday morning, or how great the preacher might be.
The truth is, if we're gonna be able to make disciples everywhere and to transform our region, this is gonna happen because the people that we rub shoulders with, I mean the people we work with, the people we go to school with, the people in our family, can look at us and say, that is a person who is not like everybody else.
I mean, that's a person who is being transformed.
I mean, isn't it true that people when they are being transformed, when they're being changed, when they are thriving?
Isn't it true that those are the people that's hard for them to shut up about it?
People who are being changed to become more like Jesus.
These people are become a powerful force because they are hard to explain away.
They become contagious.
Now, apart from that, if people look at all of us and they do not see people who are being transformed, who are not contagious, what happens then?
When we are people who are stuck in the same place, maybe a bad place, when we are not being transformed.
This morning, I want to talk about this process of focusing on myself, because whether or not I'm being transformed, whether or not we are being transformed, is the primary issue for whether or not we're going to be effective
in accomplishing the mission God has given to all of us.
So when we talk about that, I mean, the truth is if you think about it, doesn't it make sense that if we want to make disciples, that we have to be disciples?
Can't skip that step.
Doesn't it make sense?
The word disciple means to be a learner.
Somebody who's constantly learning from Jesus, who's being transformed by Jesus.
That's the life of a disciple.
If we want to make disciples,
We got to be disciples constantly, all the time.
Now, I'm not here today to say that that type change, transformation, is easy.
And I'm certainly not here today to say that I've got that all figured out.
I mean, I dream of being a better kind of person.
I mean, I dream of being that guy that when somebody pulls out in front of me on the interstate and goes 35 miles an hour,
I dream of being that guy that doesn't want to kill that person in front of me.
I still want to kill that person in front of me.
You may as well.
I dream of being the kind of person who, when it comes to fears and doubts that I just, they just don't even affect me.
I dream of being a person who takes steps of faith constantly and I still got a long way to go.
I don't know what you dream about.
You may be sitting there this morning and saying, why do I still yell at my kids so much?
Why do I still waste so much time doing stupid things?
Or maybe you say, why is this addiction that I've allowed into my life seem to be absolutely undefeatable?
I'm not here to say that change is easy.
But I am here to say that it's possible and that it's possible for you
There's a story in the fifth chapter of John's Gospel where Jesus meets a man by the pool of Bethesda one day and he asks him the most remarkable question when he says, do you want to get well?
He's been in the same condition for 38 years and he has apparently become accustomed to it.
He's lost the hope that anything can be different.
Now, I'm not asking this morning the exact same question that Jesus asked, but I'm going to change the wording a bit and ask a similar question.
I say, do you believe that you can be different?
Because you can.
Change is possible.
It's possible for you, but you just have to understand how it works and where to start.
So let's talk about that this morning, and I want to begin by asking you a simple question, and that is, what is your vision?
When we talk about this subject of spiritual growth or transformation, what's your vision of spiritual growth?
I mean, when some years ago when Deb and I were in another church, I was a pastor in another church, we had some folks who had asked us, they invited us to go skiing with them.
Now, we could never afford to do this ourselves at that particular time, but they asked us to go skiing in Colorado.
I bought the plane tickets, bought the lift tickets.
I mean, just everything.
Took care of us for a whole week, and I'll never forget.
I'll never forget the time when we got to the top of the hill for that first time.
And we looked out on that vista, and we were just in awe.
And it was like at that instant, Debbie and I looked at each other at that moment at the time of that mountain and said, we have got to bring the boys.
At the time, our kids were young, they couldn't have gone anyway at that point in time, and for goodness, we couldn't afford it.
They took us back several times.
And as they did, they gave us this, they kept talking about, you know, you ought to bring your boys out, we just never could do that.
It was out there in the realm of impossibility.
And I don't know when it actually changed.
At some point, something inside of us began to change.
And we began to see this as something that maybe it could happen.
And then one day, a switch flipped.
And we just decided we're going to do it.
And from that moment, we began to look at websites.
We began to compare prices.
We began to look at plane tickets.
It's like suddenly something had changed.
The truth is we talk about spiritual growth.
It always walks that same journey.
It begins as a vision.
It moves to a hope.
And finally, it becomes an intention.
What is your vision when it comes to spiritual growth?
You know, for all of us,
We talk about our vision for spiritual growth.
When I was a kid, I used to think about heaven.
A preacher would preach about it.
My vision about heaven was an eternal church service.
That's what my thought about heaven was.
I mean, it's like in my mind, it was like heaven meant you're gonna go there.
Everybody's gonna be wearing choir robes for all eternity.
And we're all gonna be singing songs.
Let's do a long boring sermon for all eternity.
And can I just say to you, I was not all that motivated to go to heaven.
Because my vision went wrong.
What's your vision for spiritual growth?
Is it just to become more rule focused?
Is that your vision?
When we talk about spiritual growth, the transformation, is it just to become more predictable?
Is it just to become somebody who just has to
Give up everything you love so that you can have something in heaven one day.
Is that the whole process?
This lifetime of giving up everything that you love?
Is that all that's involved in it?
What's your vision for spiritual growth?
You know, when we talk about this subject, one of my favorite books is a book by a guy named John Ortberg.
It's called The Life You Always Wanted.
And in it, he tells a story about a friend of his named Tom Schmidt.
Tom was visiting a nursing home, not a father's day, but it was on a mother's day.
And he had roses he's going to give to each of the residents.
And as he walked down the halls of this particular nursing home, he went down one hall that had patients on it that were really a little more extreme.
And he came up on a lady, he found out later, her name was Mabel.
And the polite way to say it is that Mabel was
grotesque found out later that the administrators of the nursing home when they had a new employee and they wanted to find out is this person going to be able to make it they would send them to feed Mabel because they figured that if they could stand the site of that they could stand anything else in the building so Tom walks up to this lady named Mabel on this particular day and he hands her a flower she puts it up to her face to smell it but she can't smell any more and so
She says, can I give it to somebody else?
She says, sure.
And she poked it out to the lady next to her and says, here, this is from Jesus.
She said, at that moment, I realized this is not a normal person.
Found out later that Mabel had been raised on a small farm.
She stayed there until her mom and dad had both died.
After which time she lost her sight, she began to get sick.
She'd been placed in this particular nursing home 25 years ago and all these 25 years she has been getting weaker and sicker.
She lives in a room with three patients who scream constantly and cannot engage her in conversation.
Sort of like hell on earth.
He goes back to visit her every couple of weeks along with a lot of the other patients.
And as he sits in Mabel's room, they became friends and he would read scripture to her.
And he realized that every time he stopped, she would continue word for word.
And they would sing hymns together and she would stop him from time to time and comment on the meaning.
He began to shift from being just someone who pitied her to someone who she was like a thing of wonder to him.
how someone could do this.
I mean, here's someone who has somehow tapped into a supernatural power to overcome awful things, things that would make all of us bitter and mean.
He asked her one day, says, maybe what do you think about in this room, locked in this room with these vegetables?
Not able to tell if it's day or night, and she says, I think about Jesus, I think about how good he's been to me.
She had been changed.
I just need to ask you this morning, is that your vision to be changed inwardly?
Because when we talk about Jesus' vision for you and for me, Jesus is not envisioning that you're just gonna become more rule-centered
or better able to meet somebody else's expectations.
In the seventh chapter of John's gospel.
There you go.
There you go, seventh chapter of John's gospel.
Jesus talks about the impact of the Holy Spirit in your life and mine.
And here's how he describes it.
He says, if any man is thirsty, let him come to me and drink.
He who believes in me out of his innermost being shall flow
rivers of living water.
Now listen to this, this is not something that is imposed on you from outside.
The text says, it flows out of your innermost being, something inside of your innermost being.
The King James says, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.
It's not imposed on you from outside.
You have become fundamentally a different kind of person.
It's not something that flickers on once in a while.
It's the Bible describes it as a flow.
And it's not something that's meager or just barely enough to get by and survive.
Jesus says it is like a river out of his innermost being shall flow rivers of living water.
Is this what you've envisioned?
Is this what you're aiming for, hoping for, intending to see happen?
Because it can happen.
Listen, Jesus is talking about you becoming a fundamentally different kind of person, a process that changed you from the
inside so that somewhere in the depth of your soul, you know you're a different person.
You see with different eyes, you want different things.
The things you used to be afraid of losing don't even matter to you anymore.
And you act with completely different motivations.
Is that your vision?
And let me say, have you made that your intention?
Is that your intention?
Because as I said a minute ago, all change, all spiritual change.
Yes, spiritual change is unique in the sense that the Holy Spirit is involved in this.
He's the one who triggers the desire.
He's the one that gives you power.
But on the human side, we cooperate with him.
And that part of the equation is exactly the same.
It moves from a vision to a hope to finally an intention.
And I just need to ask you this morning, have you made this your intention?
Listen, transformation can happen for you, but it's not gonna happen like catching the flu.
It's gonna happen the same way all change happens.
It moves from vision to hope to intention.
You can make this your intention.
Let me tell you how.
It moves from inward and inward change.
Vision to hope to intention.
That's all inward to finally begin to work at outward in your life.
And you do this first by reprogramming the way that you think.
Now I'm not a pilot, but I love airplanes.
And whenever I've had an opportunity, somebody is a pilot, they invite me to go.
I mean, I'm there.
So I get a chance to learn some about how these things work and, you know, buddy of mine who used to
have a plane would take me to show me how the navigation systems work.
And he'd show me how the autopilot system work and how in an airplane, if you program it on a certain heading, I mean, it is going to fly that heading because it's programmed to fly that heading.
Now you can make it go somewhere different.
If you were to take the yoke and turn it and hold it there manually, you can make it go somewhere different.
but only as long as you hold the yoke in that spot.
The minute your arms get tired or the minute you get distracted, you let go and it reverts to its programming immediately.
You know, a lot of people live their Christian life like that.
They think it's just an overdose of willpower and they do it that way for a while until they get tired
They get distracted and they let go of the yoke.
And then their programming takes over.
Listen, you can change your programming.
You can learn to think the way that God thinks.
It won't happen by accident, but you can make this happen.
Paul talks about in Romans the 12th chapter.
He says, do not be conformed this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind.
And what we're talking about here is saturating yourself with the Word of God until you begin to think, program your mind, think like God thinks.
Now listen, this coming to church is great.
Coming to church is a wonderful thing.
I'm glad you're here today.
But it won't saturate one time a week, one hour a week, won't saturate you with the Word of God.
Having a 90-second devotion every morning.
Why?
That's great.
Keep doing it.
You might want to extend it a little.
But 90 seconds a day won't saturate you.
It won't reprogram your mind.
You can reprogram your mind.
You can hear what God says, read what God says, study what God says, memorize what God says, make this a part of your everyday life all day.
Listen, I read someplace not long ago where Americans watch something like four hours of television a day.
And if you do the math, that's about in a 65 year life, that's about nine years of staring at a television screen.
It doesn't even include the other screen time.
Do you realize
that every one of those programmers has an agenda.
Every one of those movies you watch, every one of those shows you watch.
I do it as well.
We all, I mean, I'm not saying it's wrong to watch anything.
I'm just gonna be discerning.
Because everything you're exposed to is programming your mind one way or the other.
90 seconds a day won't over, it won't counteract everything the world's trying to give you or teach you.
or implant in you.
It takes more than that.
Reprogram your mind.
You're not be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind.
You can also replace trying with training.
Now, I love to hike.
If you ask me today to go hike someplace, I mean, five miles, 10 miles, hey, I'm great with that.
No problem.
But if you ask me today to run a marathon, I mean, not walking, but running.
And not five and 10 miles, but what?
24 miles?
What is it?
24.2 miles, something like that?
Six miles.
26.2.
If you ask me today to run a marathon, I cannot.
It don't matter how hard I try.
You get me?
I'll have a heart attack.
I'll fall over and die.
I do not possess the ability to do it by trying.
But I can train for it.
I mean, old and decrepit as I am, I can train for that.
You give me six months with a precise training process.
I can run a marathon.
Some of us need to replace our paradigm, and we need to realize that becoming like Jesus is not a matter of just trying harder, but it is something that we can train for.
Scientists tell us that every time you dribble a basketball, every time you play a piece of music, that there is a neural pathway physically created in your brain.
Now at first it's pretty weak, which is why we feel really awkward when we're trying to learn a skill for the first time.
But every time you repeat that action, you dribble that basketball, you play that piece of music, that neural pathway becomes more stable.
That is, it's initially, imagine like a rickety rope bridge, maybe over a river.
Every time you repeat that action in the right way.
that rope bridge becomes then a wooden bridge.
And finally, then it is a stone bridge.
And one day it is a concrete and steel super highway, which is why when we're learning new skills, we all experience it the same way.
It starts out we say, I could never do that.
And then one day we say, well, maybe I could do that.
And then I can do that.
And then we finally say, why doesn't everybody do that?
It's so natural for us.
This is why athletes and musicians, you know, no athlete loves to do the drills.
But something about these drills that they do remakes them internally.
It changes their reflexes.
Musicians don't live to play scales.
But when they play those scales, it rewires them internally.
It makes new reflexes.
The same principle applies to you and me.
The physical change also to spiritual change, how we are reflexes in terms of how we respond to situations, how we attitudes we are natural to us or actions that we take.
Christians have known for years that there are drills that remake us inwardly and create new reflexes.
These are called spiritual disciplines.
Listen, the habit of giving, which is one of the ways we need to become like Jesus to be generous, is not going to appear in you magically out of thin air, but it becomes real in you and me when we practice it.
You can practice a hundred things.
You can practice the grace of God by forgiving people.
You can practice generosity to become like Jesus by giving in a regular way.
You can practice growing your faith by obedience in small things so that one day obedience in bigger things is natural to you.
You can practice serving others, which is
what it means to become like Jesus to be humble until it's more natural for you can practice self-control about something like fasting.
There are a hundred ways you can do this.
You may need to pick one today to be intentional.
We renew the way we think.
We replace trying with training.
You know, Peter says with this process of
of reinforcing ourselves that works in the positive direction, also works in the negative direction.
He says, I urge you as aliens and strangers abstain from fleshly lust, why?
Because they wage war against the soul.
Every time I give in to what the Bible calls fleshly lust, I'm reinforcing the wrong things.
You don't have to do that.
You can reinforce the right things until they're natural for you, normal for you.
you're becoming like Jesus, reprogram your mind, replace trying with training, and then cultivate life-changing relationships, or be selective about the people you hang out with.
You know, scientists tell us, social scientists tell us that, and we've all seen it, you know, sit in a circle with people, you know, and one person just yawns, like that.
And within a minute, you ever seen this?
Everybody around the circle is somehow yawning, and why is that?
One person stands there and they're talking, and there's two people, and he crosses his arms.
And the guy who's over there next to him, some reason he crosses his arms, too, why is that?
Social scientists call that mimicking.
It's a powerful thing.
We're not aware of it, but even in things that are incidental and unimportant, we mimic each other.
We're affected by each other.
Now, you better believe that if it's true in things that are incidental and unimportant, it's also true about things that are supremely important.
Proverbs 13, verse 20 says, he who walks with wise men will be wise.
Companion of fools will suffer harm.
Listen, speak especially to young people this morning, but this is applicable to all of us.
If you want to become like Jesus, and you can, you can be transformed.
Listen, the most important and powerful influencers in your life are not gonna be a book you read
or a sermon you heard, they're going to be the people you choose to spend time with.
If you want to become like Jesus, then hang out with people who remind you of Jesus.
How simple is that?
If you want to become like Jesus, hang out with people who remind you of Jesus.
Find a group.
Get together with some guys in a no sweat group or an accountability group, but find people who remind you of Jesus.
They become the most powerful influences in your life.
Where do you need to start?
Because listen, unless we are disciples, we can't make disciples.
To be a disciple means to be transformed constantly all the time.
to subject myself to the influence of the Holy Spirit so that out of my innermost being, rivers of living water are beginning to flow.
It's a powerful thing.
And it can be true for you.
Let me ask you to bow your heads and close your eyes.
So where do you need to start?
To be intentional about change.
Not to leave it to chance, but to cooperate with the Holy Spirit so that the power that Jesus is talking about becomes absolutely real in you.
You may need to start with one of these spiritual disciplines to be intentional.
You may need to start by choosing and be more selective about the people you hang out with.
You may need to reprogram your mind with the Word of God.
Saturate yourself with the Word of God.
Father, thank You for the truth of Your Word.
Give us grace to know where we should begin.
And Father, use us as Your instruments.
We pray in Jesus' name.
Amen.